Hey there, welcome to the Paws at Data Science Hangout. I'm Libby Herron, and this is a recording
of our weekly community call that happens every Thursday at 12 p.m. U.S. Eastern Time.
If you are not joining us live, you miss out on the amazing chat that's going on. So find
the link in the description where you can add our call to your calendar and come hang
out with the most supportive, friendly, and funny data community you'll ever experience.
Can't wait to see you there. I would love to introduce you to our featured leader today,
Mine Cetinkaya-Rundel. She's a professor of the practice and senior developer advocate.
She is a professor of the practice at Duke University and a senior developer advocate
at PawsitPBC. So she is both. Mine, I would love it if you could introduce yourself. Tell
us a little bit about what you do, all the multifaceted what you do, and something you
like to do for fun.
Yeah, thank you so much for having me. This is such a lovely crowd. I'm seeing some familiar
faces and some new faces, so that's all great. Yeah, so as Libby said, I'm a professor at
Duke University. I'm in the statistical science department. I've been here for 15 years, and
I primarily teach introductory data science and data visualization with sort of a focus
on statistical thinking as well as sort of programming. So I fell in love with sort of
coding and programming much later in life myself and found it a struggle at the beginning
to love it, to be perfectly honest. So I feel like I don't know if it's the scars from that
first year of graduate school or just the mere fact that I've always enjoyed working
with new learners. That has been my niche area, and I've also been working at our studio
slash Posit for many, many years now. As part of that work, I have worked with the
Shiny team, I think, when I first started, then primarily with the Tidyverse team. I've
worked with Quarto and Positron as well, and oftentimes I find myself sort of in the space
of there's something new and exciting happening that probably needs some learning materials,
probably needs some documentation, and probably would benefit a lot from people sort of like
working with it, maybe teaching their students with it and bring back some feedback from it.
So I found this space where I have sort of a foot in both doors and get to navigate
the exciting space of data science day-to-day from learners to builders to be an exciting
place to be. And I also do lots of teaching outside of the university. I teach courses on
Coursera, I like teaching workshops, so whatever conference I'm going to, I always try to see
if I can manage to, you know, teach a workshop there and get to interact with folks who are
learning new things, maybe not in a university course setting, but in other settings and for
other reasons in their lives. So it's possible I've crossed paths with some of you as a workshop
instructor. I feel like I recognize a couple of faces in that way as well. I think we'll meet for one.
I took your workshop a couple of years ago. I also put Mimi's link in the chat, by the way, for her
courses. Thank you, thank you so much. And you asked for one other thing from me. Yeah, something you
like to do for fun. What do I like to do for fun? Honestly, lately I like to do Pilates for fun.
Is that too lame? That has been my thing that I've decided I'm going to try to make time for, but I
also really love to spend time with my kid, particularly building Legos. Oh, we love Legos
here. And Pilates is hard. I like when my cousin does Pilates and I'm always absolutely amazed.
I think that my body would fall apart. So it's something that I've always wanted to try too, though.
I like that it's hard. I can't think of anything else during that hour. I think that's why I enjoy it.
It sounds very meditative. Yeah. Yeah. All right. Well, let's hop into questions. Everybody, reminder,
we're asking questions on Slido. Stick your questions for Mine in Slido. And my first
question for Mine is, why R initially and why still R? Because I know I learned R later in life
as well, but I learned R at the same time as I learned SAS and SPSS and right next to Python as
well. And I also stuck with R really, really hard. So what was your very, very initial intro?
Yeah. So my very initial intro to R was, I think, boot camp for graduate school,
where we were told, hey, you probably know this. This is meant to be a reminder for you. And I
don't think I had written a single line of code in my life at that point. I think I had maybe written
a little bit of code. I worked for two years as an actuary prior to grad school. And we had like
an in-house language. I remember it being called Ginsu, like a knife, because you used it to sort
of chop data. If I remember correctly, that was the analogy. But even then, I was mostly sort of
like running code others have written and looking at the resulting tables and stuff. So yeah, I
learned R because I was in a statistics PhD program. That's how it started for me. So I would
say that the first few years of me using R was very much LM and then go on GLM and then go on.
You fit a model. You get the sort of the results you need. But throughout that, I've also taken
some computational statistics courses and realized that I am not ashamed to say the following. And I
wear this badge very proudly. I'm pretty good at Excel. I had to get very good at Excel in my
actuarial science job. And I'm still pretty good at it. And there are certain things that I use
it for, not data analysis, but sort of like compiling data and whatnot. And when I realized
that things I liked to do in Excel are a lot easier to do if you can actually code your way around it
and document as well, I feel like that's when I decided this is something that I enjoy. During
the time that I was working, I wrote a lot of documentation because I inherited a lot of
projects where you had to talk to another human. You had to make sure that human was in the office
in order to get the information you need. And I was always wondering, why didn't anyone write
down exactly what needs to happen? Then I realized, well, actually, if you code it,
you don't have to separately write it down as well. It's sort of like in the code itself,
what is happening. And that's when I really realized, oh, this is great. This is something
that's worth investing time in. Obviously, it is. It is, yeah. But everybody has a tipping point.
Yeah. I think for a lot of people also, it's finding out about quarto and parameters reporting
where they're like, oh, it can all be one step. It can all be one step where I'm doing the analysis,
I'm doing the report, and I'm also having it parameterized out to multiple things,
like a report for every state or a report for every school in your district or whatever.
That's the click that I see for a lot of people where they're like, oh, this is worth investing
the time to figure out how to not just do it in Excel, even though I'm really good at Excel
and I'm a spreadsheet queen. Absolutely. And my starting using R predates R Markdown even.
However, I, to this day, remember the useR conference where the keynote was about R Markdown.
This was in Nashville, I want to say 2011 or 2012, something like that. And I remember tuning
out about minute 10 of that keynote because I was like, I'm going to use it right now. Like,
I need to start using it right now. I cannot wait for this talk to be over.
And I cannot imagine like sort of being dropped into this ecosystem with all of this tooling
here. I think it would be an absolute no brainer to just like dive right in and see how many
problems it solves for me. Well, what's wild is that then 10 years later in 2022, I think you
were giving the keynote on Corto, which is where a lot of us heard about it for the first time.
That's a full circle moment. Lots, lots of full circle moments. I, yeah. And I, it was,
it was a great delight to be able to give that keynote with Julie Lowndes as well. It was really
fun working on it, but it was also, I think Corto is one of the projects where I feel like I had
like not just the opportunity, but genuinely the privilege of being involved with it from like
day one. So I would be like testing things out as they were being developed. And it was just so
nice to be able to sort of like play with something that I knew I was going to use
basically every single day of my life going forward. Yeah, that's amazing. Well, I remember my,
my biggest highlight of that talk was seeing you use mouse pose, the tool. I was like,
as a teacher, my heart stopped and I was like, I need that in my life immediately. And then,
you know, proceeded to almost tune out because I was so distracted by mouse.
Awesome functionality. Okay, well, let's head over to Slido because we have questions
stacking up. And Stephanie, Stephanie Zimmer asked a question early on. Stephanie,
are you able to unmute and ask that live? Sure. All right, I'm going to highlight it. So it goes
to the top in Slido as well. And I'll stick it in the chat. How do you balance it all? So this
is more like a career type question. Do you ever say no? And how do you do that?
Um, good question.
I'm not sure. I think that I don't have a great answer for how I balance it all. I think if you
ask folks that are sort of like personally close to me, they will tell you that I don't balance it
all. And that I sometimes that I'm at my computer an obscene number of hours a day. But I will say
one thing I have found over the years is to where I feel like it's possible for me to be picky about
projects, to pick things where I can really bridge gaps in between and look for opportunities to sort
of see, I'm supposed to do project X, and I'm supposed to do project Y, is there a way to sort
of like, bring at least parts of those together so that I can sort of be productive on both even
when I'm not like actively working on both. Oftentimes with teaching, the way I do this
is by if I'm working on some like new tooling, for example, writing documents,
testing it out, I try to see, is it feasible for me to bring it to the classroom? I will say
that the answer depends a lot on features of the class. Like, I think there are certain
things that may be too premature to bring to an introductory classroom
compared to say a more advanced smaller classroom where I might have like more one-on-one time with
students, for example, but I always try to ask myself that question and I always try to
sort of be brave about it, not in a way that should in any way diminish the student experience.
That's really sort of the guide that I keep for myself, but if it might be a little bit more extra
work for me to get things going, I'm happy to invest the time early on in that so that I can
spend the rest of that semester sort of having my eye on both sides of the project, if you will.
As an example, I'm working quite a bit on Positron things nowadays and I decided I'm
going to teach my course in Positron because I'm teaching a slightly smaller,
more advanced course right now, and it was after I could sort of like convince myself, no, this will
be a valuable like investment for the students to have learned this tool, whether they use that very
tool or not, the skills they'll get from having been in that IDE will help them with whatever
they might want to do next, and I feel like whenever I can say yes to sort of getting over
that threshold, I'm happy to jump in there with them. It does require a bit of a willingness to
sort of troubleshoot with students one-on-one, but I often learn a lot during that time.
And do I ever say no? I do, I do say no. I try to learn to say no. I mentioned Stephanie knows
I don't always because I did not say no to hosting USAR this year, which Stephanie, I was able to
wrangle into sort of being on the organization committee with me. So not always, and I try not
to for things I care deeply about, and that was a good example of one of those things that I care
deeply about, but I do try to be selective, particularly when I feel like there may be
someone else I can recommend. So once I realized it's hard for me to say no, I decided, well,
if I really want to say no and I'm going to feel bad about it, maybe I can put in a little bit of
time or reach out to my network a little bit and be like, do you know of anyone who might be
interested in this? Because if I could just pass on their name, that will let me off the hook guilt
free, and maybe, hopefully, it might be an interesting thing for them to be asked to do.
Yes, I love it. Learning to say no with grace and forgive yourself is a learned skill. Don't feel
bad if you don't have it yet, but if you don't have it yet, don't feel bad if you don't have it.
Don't feel bad if you don't have it yet. I feel like I've taken the last 10 years to figure out
how to say no and say, hey, my plate's actually as full as I like it, and, yeah, I'm happy to
shop your opportunity around to my network, and sometimes I've even said yes to things and then
had to say no to them a day later, 12 hours later, and I'm like, oh, you know what? Initially,
that's not a good, but now that I'm looking at my schedule, it's just not going to work.
Yeah, I highly recommend saying no. Stephanie, thank you for that great question. Let's head
over to Slido. Reminder, everybody, you can ask questions for Mina in Slido. I have a link in the
chat for you, and you can also upvote questions that you like. So we had an anonymous question
that says, as you teach, how do you stay up-to-date on newer techniques, packages,
et cetera, and when do you decide to integrate them into lessons and workshops? I think you
talked about the last part of that a little bit already, but the how do you stay up-to-date part,
I feel like, is a great one because a lot of people lately are like, where do I look? Who
do I follow? What do I read? They're looking for sort of a single source of all the things.
There are a few good ones. What about you? What do you think? Yeah, I think that maybe compared to
about five years or so ago, the landscape of how I stay up-to-date is different, and I do sort of
long for the days where there was one place I could go to, and I knew that our stats was really
active there, and I could learn about all the new things. So it has taken a little bit more time,
I feel like, for me to find nuggets of information here and there. I never thought I was a
podcast person, but I've been trying to make myself listen to podcasts more. I mean, by the
way, I am a podcast person. I listen to, wait, wait, don't tell me religiously, okay? That's
actually a radio show, not even a podcast. I listen to it as a podcast. I love it,
so I clearly can listen to things. I'm Googling this as we speak.
But I hadn't really used that format for things related to professional stuff, for example,
but I realized that it's kind of nice to sort of hear not just names of things,
which might be what I might be getting from a social media post, but also a little bit of
a description of how people are using these tools. So I have been trying to listen to some podcasts.
I do weekly tune into the, or it's not necessarily weekly, but whenever I can,
tune into the Posit test set podcast, for example. I feel like I've learned new things
from there that I wanted to try out, for example, that I think is neat. Additionally,
I've been using Blue Sky more, honestly, just trying to catch up with that. And whenever folks
have sort of like lists of things they have done, I enjoy that. And I particularly like
following folks who teach as well, and can have examples from not just like where they're using
certain tooling as part of their work, but how they have integrated it into their teaching.
I find those to be the most aspirational for myself. And one other thing that I do to myself,
I don't know that I would recommend this, but if they're educators among us, I say,
give it a try. The best way to try out a new thing that you have already decided is worth
your time, but you're just like not able to carve the time for, is to put it on your syllabus.
And now you've made it public, and now you've got to live up to it, one way or another.
I love that.
You're committed to it. So I'm teaching my advanced data visualization course that is in R.
I'm this semester for the third time, I think, at Duke. And I've decided the last three weeks
will be Python data visualization. I've already promised it. It's going to have to happen.
Yeah, it's going to happen. Are you going to do Matplotlib and Seaborn? Are you going to do
Plot9?
So I will do Matplotlib and Seaborn, sort of to give a, I think what I have dedicated is a lecture
of sort of landscape, one lecture on sort of data structures and stuff, just so we can like get a
data frame in there. And then one on sort of landscape of tooling that's most popular that
you're probably going to come across, but then dedicate much of the time to Plot9 because,
well, I'm a ggplot2 fan, so that's where my heart is.
Soraya says, Plotly. I think there's so many options. I'm a Plotly Express person,
I do. Although I Plotly Express and then I get stuck and I'm like, wait,
now I can't go Plotly Express. I need to go do original Plotly because I want to do,
I want to have more fine-grained control. Bill is shaking his head like, yeah, yeah, yeah.
That always happens to me. I go all the way to the wall with Plotly Express and then realize,
oh, I should have started with more fine-grained control.
All right. Thank you so much, anonymous question asker, for asking that question.
Let's hop back over to Slido to Natasha's question. Natasha, you asked, and she has a
little asterisk there, which means, hey, let me read this for me. It's, what is your approach for
explaining difficult topics to students? And I like this topic because I really like Mine's process.
You want to talk a little bit about your process? Maybe, maybe, what is it called?
Let them have the cake first. Yeah. Let them eat cake first. Yes.
Yeah. So, my approach generally is to first sort of show, try to communicate why I think this is
an important thing to learn. And that's usually without even calling out the name. So, I'll try
to give sort of an example from my class, maybe to make it a little bit more concrete.
I don't know about you all, but for me, regular expressions are a difficult concept. I know in
the age of chat GPT, they may be a little bit easier, but still, for me, I've never like fully
wrapped my head around exactly what I need. I've also found it in the past sort of difficult to
motivate that. So, one way that I have sort of, I integrate some of this like text parsing sort
of stuff into my classes. I will give a real data set to students and I will also give them
a visualization saying, this is where we're starting and this is where we're going to end up.
And we first break apart the sort of the visualization to say, oh, that's what's on the
y-axis. That's what's on the x-axis. This is what we color the data by. So, we've decided we need
these three or four columns in a data frame. That's our goal. So, we need to get from our
starting point data frame to this data frame that has these columns of information that, for example,
it's voting district names, but they have been sort of concatenated in some way where you've
taken away some of the letters so that you can join it with another shapefile or something like
that. So, we work through the process of this is our end, like that's where we're going to get the
at the end, the cake. That's the pretty picture we're going to make. We break it apart to see what
are the ingredients of that cake. And then I say, you know what? It would be really tedious to go
through this data set row by row and clean it up manually. Can we think of some logic we could write
in order to be able to sort of transform these columns into that? So, instead of starting from
the beginning and hoping that people will stick with you until the end, I tried to give away the
punchline first and then take it back and say, hopefully, I have made it clear to you that it's
worthwhile to stick with this lesson because you know where we're going to get to at the end.
I often think about when I first learned linear algebra, for example, which was,
I don't know, second or third year of college. And then when I got why anyone thought I should
learn linear algebra, which was second year in graduate school, and I told you I worked for two
years in between, that's a pretty big gap in between those two things. And that's not to say
I didn't have a good professor, like that is not it at all. It just was not how I was taught versus,
for example, our students at Duke now, our statistics majors have an option to take a
linear algebra course that's designed specifically for people working with data. So, they get the
nuggets of like, where will I apply this earlier on that they report to be a lot more motivating.
So, I sort of try to think about that delay I had related to this like important foundational
concepts and how long it took me to get the punchline of why anyone thought I should be
learning them. And I try to reduce that time as much as possible. I find that students, when they
realize this is worth investing time and brain cells in, they are more motivated to stick with it
or ask questions. And if I just tell them, like, if you just stick with me, at the end, I will show
you that it's worthwhile. I lose quite a few of them along the way. Yeah, the just trust me thing
is like the equivalent of a parent saying, because I said so, which is never satisfying.
Like, I want to know why. I myself did not get to take a linear algebra course. It was not an
option for me in either of my programs. And so, I had to struggle through like learning PCA without
knowing what a vector was. And it was awful. So, when I got through my programs and then I started
learning linear algebra on my own, I was like, oh my gosh, are you freaking kidding me? If they had
taught me this at the same time as like PCA, my life would have been better. Everything would have
been better, but it wasn't an option. I don't know if I would have appreciated linear algebra
if I had not struggled through PCA first, if I had not struggled through vectors and eigenvectors
and stuff and eigenvalues first. So, yeah, I still have never taken, it's my greatest
sadness, academic sadness. I know, I need to go sign up for just one linear algebra course.
Yeah, as an independent learner, it would be awful, but amazing. All right. Thank you, Natasha,
for asking that fantastic question. Let's head back over to Slido where we have so many questions.
I wanted to get Noor in here because I'm curious about this too. Noor, are you able to ask your
question live? I'm going to highlight it and I'm also going to paste it into the chat for everybody
to see and for you to remind you. Hello, Mine, you said? Is that how I pronounce it correctly?
Yeah. Okay. Technically, I'm your mortal enemy because I went to UNC, but I'll forgive you,
I guess. But you mentioned that you inspire new learners through hands-on data exploration
with R, but how do you identify appropriate data sets for beginners? Do you have any particular
resources or tips for doing that? Yeah. Not my mortal enemy, Noor. My mom's name is Noor,
so it's very close to my heart, actually. The way I think about data sets is not so much
is it in its rawest form appropriate for new learners, but more is the context something that
might be interesting to them. And turns out, there is one thing years of experience is bad for
and that's staying connected with the youth. What I think is interesting every day is farther from
what my first and second year undergraduate students think is interesting. So every semester,
at the beginning of the semester, I always do a Getting to Know You survey. Sometimes I use some
of that data just to genuinely get to know my students. Sometimes I teach courses up to 300
students, so I don't end up getting to individually know them. So just reading through the narratives
that they write there whenever I can make time sort of helps me stay connected with them a little
bit. But one of the questions we ask on the survey are like, what sorts of data are you
interested in exploring? So they will say some things like related to criminal justice or related
to public health. And sometimes I try to prompt them to be as specific as possible, not like
linked to a data set, but to be as specific as possible, just so I can sort of then keep that
in the back of my mind. So maybe next time there's a Tidy Tuesday data set, I'm like, oh,
one of the students had mentioned they'd be interested in something like this. It gives me
a cue to take a note of it. I also mentioned I like listening to the radio a lot. I don't drive
much actually nowadays, but when I do, I always have NPR on. And if they mention a study or
something like that, I will quickly go look up if I think it might be interesting to see if the
data is available with it and then just download it. And then what I do is once I have the raw data,
I think about it as, what do I need to do to this data to make it semi-prepared for the audience
that I have or for the topic that I want to teach? And I am a firm believer in bringing real data
sets into the classroom. I don't necessarily think that every real data set has to be brought
into the classroom in the rawest form that I have found it. I think a little bit of mise en place,
like a little bit of prep is okay, just so that we're not always sort of spending class time to
get it to the point and we can get to the point that we want to make a lot more easily. And
you know, whenever I teach, there's students work on projects where they work with data starting in
its rawest form because they are finding the data sets themselves. Hopefully we teach them enough
to, you know, the skills enough between different data sets to sort of do the tasks that they need
to do to prep their data. But I oftentimes will do like halfway prep so that we can pick things up
and I can just get to the point of the sort of the topic for that day.
You don't have to struggle through the ins and outs of like terrible string manipulation stuff.
And I totally get that. If that's not the focus of the course, then we bypass that. And what we
do is the pivoting and joining, for example. Yeah, that allows me to sort of keep the data
sets fresh because I can always like do that prep myself and bring it in. I do try to sort of bring
current data sets in whenever possible. But then there are some sort of canonical data sets
that, you know, work well for things. But I will say that I love, I love the penguins data set.
But last semester when I taught data science, I told myself I don't get to use it past week
too because it's so neat and they're so cute. I sometimes feel like if I'm running out of time,
I'm just going to plug it in there. I was like, nope, that's it. No more penguins.
I love it. Yeah, penguins is irresistible. I will plug Tidy Tuesday here. If you don't know
what Tidy Tuesday is, Isabella put a link in the chat to it. It is a social data project where
everybody gets together to contribute data sets. Most of them are real, real world data sets. Many
of them are very messy. Some of them are more clean. You get to see the source of the data.
You get to understand it conceptually, get information about it, read articles about it
sometimes. I have submitted a data set. Absolutely go submit a data set if you've never done it.
So much of that work though is done by John Harmon who runs it now. And they also have,
it's run by DSLC, Data Science Learning Community. There's also a Slack, you can go participate
there. So if you are interested in doing a weekly data challenge with the data community,
hop on Blue Sky, post your hashtag Tidy Tuesday. But it's also just that repo on GitHub is so rich
and full of different, like I go and grab, if people work on surveys, they want to learn survey
data. There is a really, really messy survey on there that's full of, you know, terrible open
text fields that you get to struggle through. All right. Thank you so much for that amazing
question, Noor. Let's hop back over to Slido. And Tony, you had a question. Let's see.
There you go. There he is. Do you want to ask yours live? Let me put it in the chat.
Sure. I'm just curious how frustrating it is for you when you see statistics being used
in a misleading way in the media and social media. And to know if you address that with
your students in your intro class and how you deal with that. Thanks. Yeah, very frustrating,
as you can imagine. Although sometimes, I feel like I've heard this. I don't really watch a lot
of TV, but I watch lots of clips of like late night comedy TV shows, you know, the talk shows.
And they often joke that like if things are sort of not the brightest in politics, it creates a
lot of like material for them. So the joke is that they don't want these things to be happening,
but it makes their job easier. Honestly, sometimes I feel like seeing these awful,
awful visualizations that are not just awful, because someone made an honest mistake, but they
were clearly designed to mislead people. While it does very much break my heart, sometimes I can't
help but feel like it makes my job a lot easier to say, this is not how to do things. So to be able
to bring them to the classroom, and have the students reflect on it a little bit, and then
sort of talk about how would we fix it. Another thing that we do, I do this in my intradata
science course, and in my visualization course as well. If I see a visualization like that,
I either track down, try to track down the data set, or to be perfectly honest, the most misleading
visualization examples I've seen actually are visualizing like five, you know, data points
anyway, that you can sort of like glean from the picture, and make a data frame yourself by looking
at it. And I ask students to plot it themselves on the correct scale, for example, just so they can
see the stark difference, so that we can actually tell them, look, like it would have been hard to
make an honest mistake here. Someone really was moving these points around the plot to make the
story what they want to be. I think they can be really educational. I think one of the trickier
parts of this is to sort of pick examples that are, where we can keep the conversation around
the misuse of statistics, maybe perhaps as opposed to around sort of my personal opinions around
whether we should be discussing that topic, or whether this is even something to be presented in
that way or not. That's a personal struggle. But beyond that, in terms of the misuse of statistics,
unfortunately, there are good examples of this out there, and I think I certainly do bring them to
the classroom. In my introductory data science course, we do a module on data science ethics.
When I first started teaching this course, this was the last module in the course,
and quickly I realized that may not be sending the right message. The last topic is like, sometimes
you don't even end up having time for it, because it snowed that semester or whatever. So I actually
moved it to the middle of the semester, when students are looking for data sets and trying to
come up with a proposal for their project, so that we are talking about data science ethics at
the time that they are building a data science project themselves, so they can ask themselves
the question of, is this even something I should be collecting data on? Is this even a question I
should be posing in that way? And the three sort of units in that module is misrepresentation,
so we talk about visualizations and other representation of data, particularly in news media,
algorithmic bias, and data privacy, and that falls really nicely right after I teach them
web scraping. I tell them, well, don't scrape everything. Well, there are some recommendations
in the chat as well that I will call out, people adding links to things that have good examples of
misleading visualizations. I linked a couple of, or talked about a couple of Reddit subs
that have misleading charts. Some parts of Reddit are not the best, so go to Reddit at your own
peril. But yes, I think that's a fantastic question, and I wanted to move slightly towards a
career advice section of the talk, because while we are missing Rachel today, this is Rachel's
favorite topic. So, let's head that direction with Raha's question. Raha, if you are available
to ask it live, we could do that, or I could read it for you, and I will stick it in the chat as well.
Let me try to remember my question. Oh good, you put it in the chat. My inspiration when I was
thinking about this is that when you're teaching coding to students, you're usually a pretty
straightforward, clear communicator, like this is the algorithm, this is why we're doing it,
these are the steps, and then their task is to implement it. But in the real world, when they go
to work in my setting, which would be like clinical data science, and they're working
with FDs or wet lab scientists who aren't doing the analysis, there's this huge communication gap
of someone who, it's never as detailed as it needs to be, or it's too detailed. So either
people just give you the data set, and they're like, do the analysis, and people don't know why,
or what the caveats are, or they can be kind of micro manipulative about it, and take away
take away the science portion from their collaborators, and not have them have a say in
it too. So in your classes, do you give any advice on students for how to communicate with people
from different fields? I think a little bit, and I'll try to sort of say some sort of bigger
idea things in terms of how I try to communicate with folks like that, and then maybe some little
tips as well. So on one hand, when I am talking with folks who are interested in the results
that will ultimately be sort of squeezed out of the data, and the answers to the research
questions they're interested in, and they are not that interested in how you got there,
I sort of think about it, I don't know why I always come up with food analogies, but it's
always like, well, when I go to a restaurant, and the dish is really good, sometimes I'm curious how
it was made, and sometimes I'm not. Sometimes I'm just happy that someone figured out how to make
this for me, and I can just enjoy it as is, and I might have questions about which wine it pairs
with, but I don't need to try to make it myself. So oftentimes I'm thinking about it as, if the
person is interested in genuinely sort of understanding how the analysis was carried out,
then we can have a detailed conversation about that. But if they're just interested in the
results, and if I'm talking to, for example, a practitioner, what I try to get out of them is,
when I presented this table or this visualization to you, do these numbers make sense to you at all?
Are these in the order of what you would expect to see or not? And if not, why? Can you articulate
that to me? I can then translate that conversation back to my analysis steps,
and then come back with, well, I think here is the disjoint. Either you were right,
I assumed something during my analysis that I shouldn't have, or no, you have this sort of
preconceived notion about what this should have been because of what you know about the domain,
but here is what I am finding, how I'm finding this data to be different. So how do we negotiate
this gap between what you were expecting to see and the results that are coming out of this?
So I think I will basically say, I don't try to communicate about the code or the methodology
sometimes unless that person is willing to invest the time in for that. The more sort of like
tip I give my students, and mind you, a majority of them are sort of like intro students, but they
probably will, you know, at a minimum, have an internship near term after that course where
they might generate a data analysis report and someone's going to read. I find that
they get so sort of hung up on how they got to a particular result, like the code that was needed
to get there, because so much of what I teach ends up being about that, that they think of the number
of hours that went into producing the results as something your audience should appreciate,
and I just don't think that's true. Sadly, that's not true. I mean, they might appreciate it as a
human, but they basically need the report to stand alone. So I often, not often, always tell
my students when you're, before you finalize your data science project, you have to add
echo false to your corto document and hide all of the code, and now read it again. Does it actually
hang together? And what they submit, even though we do evaluate their code as well, what they
submit is a write-up without the code. It's just the words and the results, and I want to make sure
that they, at a minimum, once read it as such. It turns out, as much as I love corto, and I think
I've said it enough that everyone believes me, when you actually have a document with a bunch
of code in it, I think it's so hard to focus on the takeaway message that you just need to sort
of like take that away and read that document one more time to see is what I'm saying hanging
together to the person who can't see how these results were produced. And oftentimes, I have them
do peer review across teams that are working with the code hit, like they do a code peer review
that's separate from the content peer review, if you will, and the comments they get are very
different. And I think it's really important if the goal is to communicate results that you're
putting in just as much effort into the narrative around the results and not just about like the
excruciating pain you had to get to the results. Yeah, I think that that narrative part, there's
something to be said there as well for not talking in statistics language when you're explaining
things. Like you probably should not be explaining p-values and confidence intervals. Like you
shouldn't be using that language. Probably the people you're talking to aren't going to understand
it. Or if they do understand it, they're misinterpreting it, right? That part was
really hard for me to learn. But also like you can put everything you want into an appendix.
Also, you could put it in a blog and people on the internet who do what we do, who do appreciate the
process, will love you for it. So if you really need people to appreciate you, apply for a posit
conf talk, right? And like, yeah, find your people who really appreciate the process. It's just not
your executives, probably. Okay, we are at the 50 minute past mark. We're so close to the end.
I would love to get a few more questions in from Slido. But I also want to ask Rachel's question
always, which is, do you have a piece of career advice for us that you that has been meaningful to
you or helpful or you like to give others? Yeah, let me see what kind of, I think so many times
in my life, I have decided it's too late to do X. And then turns out it's not. I tried to learn
to play the guitar when I was 16. And then I told myself, it's too late. Like my life has
passed already. All my friends who know how to play the guitar already are good. Like it's too
late to get into it. And I think I've regretted it to this day that I did. And so I try to sort of
like get things like if I can have one piece of career advice that it is okay to try new things.
Actually, I love learning new things. I fully acknowledge I won't be as good at some of the
new things I learn as I am at other things. And I have just learned to make peace with that.
And then the other thing, I'm not necessarily sure how many people this would apply to, but I will
give this. So as we said at the beginning, I'm a professor. For those of you who are academics,
you might know that a professor's life is like teaching research and there's like some service
component. I'm on a bunch of committees. Sometimes people talk about this as a drag.
I have managed to finagle my way into committee work that allows me to code in R and generate
quarter reports and impress people. So just find the things you love in the things that you might
not enjoy as much and see if you can like bring them in there. That's how I try to find joy in
some of the parts of my life that at face value doesn't seem like it's what I want to be spending
my time on. But turns out I can always impress people with some data analysis. So I've enjoyed
doing that. Thank you. I think those are fantastic pieces of advice. And I will echo that. You're
never too old for anything. I came to coding late. I was in my thirties when I learned code.
I was an Excel queen and I almost dropped my first R course. It was like introduction to
data management and programming in R like two weeks in. I told my professor, hi, this is awful.
I'm terrible. I'm never going to be able to learn this. Do you have like a tutor or something? And
he's like, you're going to be fine. You have to chill. And I went home and told my husband I'm
for sure dropping this course. There's no way. Like I am great with all the stats and I just
can't do this programming thing. It's so abstract. And my husband comforted me for about a minute.
And then after that, he was like, fine, quit. Just quit. Just, you don't have to do it. Just
give up. Just drop the course. And I got so mad that reverse psychology worked so well that I
went out and I got R for dummies. The book R for dummies. I read the whole thing in a weekend.
I passed that class with like a high B and then I struggled through the rest of my R courses
in my program and really stuck with it. But every single like summer, every winter break,
I tried to do R on my own. I couldn't do it. Couldn't do it. Couldn't do it. But I just kept
going. You can do it. If you're in your thirties and you're like, I'm never going to be able to
learn something new again or your forties or your fifties, you totally can. Martha Stewart didn't
start her business until she was in her mid thirties. Vera Wang didn't start her design
business until she was in her forties. Like they're doing fine. Right. All right. Well,
their caveat, I couldn't learn Minecraft. That's what I tried to do over my winter break. So maybe
there is a limit to what I can learn. I've been informed by a nine year old that I'm no good,
but everything else I'm still trying. I think as long as you're having fun, there are no rules.
Okay. Let's hop back over. Maybe we can rapid fire some questions from Slido. And in order to
help us go a little bit faster, I will read some of them. One is from Edward who says,
have you ever convinced an organization, department or person to abandon Excel
for something like R or Python? Is that something that you've done or did you
leave the industry behind and say, nope, I'm going to go teach. I'm not going to
waste my time convincing people to change. Yeah, I don't think I've necessarily convinced anyone.
If I have, it's by taking on the work of doing it myself. So I don't know that that's good advice.
No worries. I mean, it's hard. Convincing people is tough. I think a lot of teaching stats skills
overlaps with convincing people to learn stats. Like when you people are teaching or taking your
courses, they're not always there because they're invested to learn the thing. A lot of times
they're there because they have to learn the thing. And there will be those same types of
people when you're convincing others to learn it. There will be those who are like, I'm invested in
this. And there will be those who are like, get away from me. I don't want this. And you just
have to know the difference. All right. How about our cynicism question? University of Nebraska
recently announced they'll be shutting down their stats program. How do you feel about statistics,
about how statistics is viewed these days in the context of things like AI and ML?
I am aware of this and I am so heartbroken and sort of appalled by it, to be perfectly honest.
I have colleagues and dear friends who work and teach there. For those of you who may not
be familiar with it, I highly recommend reading some of the pieces that Susan Vander Plaats and
Heike Hoffman sort of did an analysis of how these decisions were reached and how
there are so many gaps in sort of the reasoning that led, that the university has said that led
to this closure. So I cannot believe it, but I will say I personally find it hard to draw a line
between sort of like how stats is viewed and valued in the face of like AI and ML and like
what happened there. I think bigger problems existed in terms of how that particular decision
was made. I will say that I think it's my sort of like my feeling that statisticians tend to be
on average pretty humble, I think, and sometimes we're not the loudest in a room where these
conversations are happening. Again, this is not a comment about what happened at UNL, but in general
in terms of this space of this like AI and ML, I think there is incredible value in sort of knowing
and understanding and appreciating statistical modeling when you're operating in these circles,
and I don't know if we managed to shout it as loud as we could from the rooftops. I do think
that there is room for sort of statisticians in these domains, and one thing I will say is that
when I look at some of these, you know, big companies that have big AI and ML teams, among
their leadership is often folks with stats PhDs, and they're there for a reason for sure.
That's not to say you need a stat PhD to be working on these problems, of course, but I think
it's still heartening to me to see that those folks are there because when it comes to really
sort of building a roadmap for like where to take projects to, that statistician's insight clearly
is still valuable, and I believe it will continue to be so. At the same time, we as statisticians
need to be nimble ourselves and need to sort of rethink our workflows, processes, techniques,
sort of in light of these developments happening. So just saying, oh, this is all hype, I don't
think is all that productive either. Yeah, it's not black and white. There's like a bunch of
nuance in there, and also on the humble topic, statisticians and stats people are humble.
That is why the world benefits so much when you work out loud, and when you talk about things,
and when you share your work with people, and help them understand, and you share your love
for your topic. Go forth, you're only making the world better. Thank you so much for that
fantastic question, and I think we have time for one more from Neil. He says, in your intro,
you talked about learning R, teaching R, and then giving keynote talks. Was there a tipping point
in your R journey where you felt experienced enough to give keynotes? What was that transition
like for you? And I love this question so much, because there was such a tipping point for me to
even feel like I could teach. Like, I'm at the point where I could teach others. It was tough
for me. Yeah, I mean, the teach part, in a way, came easily to me, because I had to do it, in
the sense that I had to be a teaching assistant to get through my graduate program. That was a
program requirement, and I am so glad that it was. You know, I don't know that I would have found this
as something I enjoy doing, that I can be good at doing, that I can improve at doing, had I not been
provided that opportunity. So, for someone who is maybe not in the academic circle, I would say,
if that's the sort of thing you want to try your hand at, oftentimes, folks reach out and say,
hey, can I, like, TA this workshop you're giving? Like, I'll just be there anyway. Can I help out
in some way? Like, that could be a way to sort of get your feet wet, if you will. Plus, with, I think,
a lot of the sort of the online mediums where you can build an audience and sort of, like, try to
teach them yourself, if you want to give that a try, I think that's an option, too. But for me,
it was the working as a teaching assistant first is where I realized I really enjoy this,
and I found myself putting in more time than necessary into it because I got so much joy
out of it, that that was, for me, the tipping point for I want to sort of dedicate more of my
time to teaching. For keynotes, I don't know. I couldn't believe it the first time someone asked
me to give a keynote, to be perfectly honest. But I think that I try maybe not saying no,
like, not knowing how to say no sometimes helps because people ask you things and you say yes,
and the next thing becomes easier to say yes to. Once you've done it once. Yeah, if something sounds
exciting, I'd say go for it. And what I have found is that when someone has approached me
with something where I feel a bit like, I don't even know if I'm a good fit. Why did you come to
me? They're often very willing to have that conversation and share some insights as to
what I might expect from that audience and getting that feedback from them is usually helpful for
feeling like, okay, I feel like I'm ready to do this. Yeah, well, nobody who knows you,
Mine would ever assume that you were never ready for a keynote talk or teaching. So sometimes it's
believe the people around you and what they see in you. I think Catherine Girton gave that advice
when she was here on the Hangout, and I love it. Believe other people and their belief in you.
Well, we're at the top of the hour, so we have to say goodbye. Mine, thank you so much for joining
us. I hope you had fun. Yeah, and if everybody enjoyed this conversation about learning and
teaching, Alyssa Dillman is joining us next week. She is another data educator and a huge,
um, not workshop giver. What is it called? Hackathon giver. If you would love to talk
about data hackathons, she's your girl. So come join us next week with Alyssa Dillman. We'll see
you on the Discord server, and I will see you maybe Tuesday for Data Science Lab. Isabella and
I will be joined by Kylie Ainsley. She will be talking about our projects as our package
structures. Hope you have a fantastic week and weekend. We'll see you next time. Bye!